fuzzel.ini(5)                 File Formats Manual                fuzzel.ini(5)

NAME
       fuzzel.ini - configuration file for fuzzel(1)

DESCRIPTION
       fuzzel uses the standard unix configuration format, with section based
       key/value pairs. The default section is usually unnamed, i.e. not
       prefixed with a [section]. However it can also be explicitly named
       [main], say if it needs to be reopened after any of the other sections.

       fuzzel will search for a configuration file in the following locations,
       in this order:

           o   XDG_CONFIG_HOME/fuzzel/fuzzel.ini (defaulting to
               ~/.config/fuzzel/fuzzel.ini if unset)
           o   XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/fuzzel/fuzzel.ini (defaulting to
               /etc/xdg/fuzzel/fuzzel.ini if unset)

       An example configuration file containing all options with their default
       value commented out will usually be installed to
       /etc/xdg/fuzzel/fuzzel.ini.

SECTION: main
       include
           Absolute path to configuration file to import.

           The import file has its own section scope. I.e. the including
           configuration is still in the default section after the include,
           regardless of which section the included file ends in.

               o   The path must be an absolute path, or start with ~/.
               o   Multiple include directives are allowed, but only one path
                   per directive.
               o   Nested imports are allowed.

           Default: not set.

       namespace
           Namespace for the spawned layer shell surface. Useful for blocking
           fuzzel out from screencasts in your compositor if it shows
           sensitive information, such as passwords.

           Default: launcher

       output
           Output (monitor) to display on. You can list the available outputs
           with wlr-randr or with Sway using swaymsg -t get_outputs.

           Example: DP-1

           Default: Not set-- let the compositor choose output.

       font
           Comma separated list of fonts to use, in fontconfig format. That
           is, a font name followed by a list of colon-separated options. Most
           noteworthy is :size=n, which is used to set the font size. Note
           that the font size is also affected by the dpi-aware option. See
           FONT CONFIG below for details.

           Examples:
               o   Dina:weight=bold:slant=italic
               o   Courier New:size=12
               o   Fantasque Sans Mono:fontfeatures=ss01

           Default: monospace.

       use-bold
           Boolean. When set, fuzzel may use bold fonts. For example, for the
           currently selected item. Default: no

       dpi-aware
           auto, yes, or no.

           When set to yes, fonts are sized using the monitor's DPI, making a
           font of a given size have the same physical size, regardless of
           monitor.

           In this mode, the monitor's scaling factor is ignored; doubling the
           scaling factor will not double the font size.

           When set to no, the monitor's DPI is ignored. The font is instead
           sized using the monitor's scaling factor; doubling the scaling
           factor does double the font size.

           Finally, if set to auto, fonts will be sized using the monitor's
           DPI if all monitors have a scaling factor of 1. If at least one
           monitor as a scaling factor larger than 1 (regardless of whether
           the fuzzel window is mapped on that monitor or not), fonts will be
           scaled using the scaling factor.

           Note that this option typically does not work with bitmap fonts,
           which only contains a pre-defined set of sizes, and cannot be
           dynamically scaled. Whichever size (of the available ones) that
           best matches the DPI or scaling factor, will be used.

           Also note that if the font size has been specified in pixels
           (:pixelsize=N, instead of :size=N), DPI scaling (dpi-aware=yes)
           will have no effect (the specified pixel size will be used as is).
           But, if the monitor's scaling factor is used to size the font (dpi-
           aware=no), the font's pixel size will be multiplied with the
           scaling factor.

           Default: auto.

       gamma-correct
           Boolean. When enabled, fuzzel will do gamma-correct blending in
           linear color space. This is how font glyphs are supposed to be
           rendered, but since nearly no applications or toolkits are doing it
           on Linux, the result may not look like you are used to.

           Compared to the default (disabled), bright glyphs on a dark
           background will appear thicker, and dark glyphs on a light
           background will appear thinner.

           FreeType can limit the effect of the latter, with a technique
           called stem darkening. It is only available for CFF fonts
           (OpenType, .otf) and disabled by default (in FreeType). You can
           enable it by setting the environment variable
           FREETYPE_PROPERTIES="cff:no-stem-darkening=0" before starting
           fuzzel.

           Also be aware that many fonts have been developed on systems that
           do not do gamma-correct blending, and may therefore look thicker
           than intended when rendered with gamma-correct blending, since the
           font designer set the font weight based on incorrect rendering.

           In order to represent colors faithfully, higher precision image
           buffers are required. For this reason, fuzzel uses 16-bit image
           buffers (instead of 8-bit) when gamma-correct blending is enabled.

           It is not possible to enable gamma-correct blending in cairo
           enabled builds of fuzzel, since cairo does not support 16-bit image
           buffers.

       placeholder
           Text to display as placeholder in the input box. Default: empty.

       prompt
           String to use as input prompt. Note that trailing spaces are
           trimmed, unless the string is quoted. Default: "> ".

       icon-theme
           Icon theme. Note that the name is case sensitive. Default: default.

       icons-enabled
           Boolean. When enabled, application icons (from the selected icon-
           theme) will be rendered. Default: yes.

       hide-before-typing
           Boolean. When enabled, application list will be hidden until the
           first letter is typed. When the prompt is cleared again, the list
           will appear. Default: no.

       fields
           Comma separated list of XDG Desktop entry fields to match against.

           Even though fuzzel only displays the application names, matching
           can (and by default is) be done against other fields as well.
           Supported fields are:

           o   filename
           o   name
           o   generic
           o   exec
           o   categories
           o   keywords
           o   comment

           "filename" is the ".desktop" file name.

           Default: filename,name,generic.

       password-character
           Default character to use with the command line option --password.
           Note that this can be overridden on the command line, by explicitly
           specifying the character with --password=X. Default: *.

       match-mode
           One of exact, fzf and fuzzy.

           exact: what you type is matched exactly against each field in the
           fields list.

           fzf: fzf-style matching, where substrings from what you have typed
           are matched against each field in the fields list.

           fuzzy: levenshtein-based fuzzy matching of what you have typed
           against each field in the fields list.

           Default: fzf

       sort-result
           Boolean. Whether to sort the result or not. Disabling sorting means
           no comparisons will be made between match results. I.e. launch
           count, match length, etc will be ignored. This effectively disables
           the cache (though, the cache is still updated on exit).

           Disabling this can improve search latency when searching very large
           data sets.

           Default: yes

       match-counter
           Boolean. When enabled, the match count and total count is displayed
           on the right-hand side of the input prompt. Disabling the counter
           also improves performance when loading a very large number of dmenu
           entries from STDIN.

           Default: no.

       filter-desktop
           Boolean. Filter desktop files based on the value of
           XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP. Default: no.

       show-actions
           Boolean. Some desktop files define "actions", in addition to the
           application itself. Examples are "new window", "preferences", etc.
           When this option is enabled, those actions will be listed by
           fuzzel. Default: no.

       terminal
           terminal command to use when launching 'terminal' programs.

           The command may contain the placeholder {cmd} which will be
           replaced with the actual command to be run. When {cmd} is present,
           the command is only substituted in those locations and is not
           appended at the end.

           Examples:
           o   foot -a '{cmd}' -T '{cmd}' {cmd} sets app-id and title to the
               command name, then executes it
           o   xterm -e {cmd} executes the command in xterm
           o   xterm -e (no {cmd}) uses old behavior: appends command after
               terminal args

           Default: $TERMINAL -e.

       list-executables-in-path
           Boolean. When enabled, the list will include executables from the
           PATH environment variable. Default: no.

       launch-prefix
           Prefix to add before argv of executed program. If set, fuzzel will
           pass the Desktop File ID of the chosen application (see the Desktop
           Entry specification) in the FUZZEL_DESKTOP_FILE_ID environment
           variables. Default: not set.

       anchor
           Set window anchor, i.e. where on screen the window will be
           displayed.  You can choose one from:

           o   top-left
           o   top
           o   top-right
           o   left
           o   center
           o   right
           o   bottom-left
           o   bottom
           o   bottom-right

           Default: center

       x-margin
           Horizontal margin away from the anchor point in pixels. Default: 0.

           Note: this option has no effect when anchor=center, top or bottom.

       y-margin
           Vertical margin away from the anchor point in pixels. Default: 0.

           Note: this option has no effect when anchor=center, left or right.

       lines
           Number of matches to show. Default: 15.

       hide-prompt
           Boolean. When set, hides the prompt line, making the window
           smaller. Input is still accepted though the prompt line is not
           displayed. Cannot be used with prompt-only. Default: no.

       minimal-lines
           Boolean. Adjust the number of lines to display to the minimum of
           lines and the number of input lines. Only effective in dmenu mode.
           This allows fuzzel to size itself to the actual number of input
           lines rather than always showing the full lines rows. Default: no.

       width
           Window width, in characters. Margins and borders not included. For
           variable width fonts this is an estimate, as the exact number of
           characters that will fit depends on which characters are being
           displayed. Default: 30.

       tabs
           Number of spaces a tab is expanded to. Default: 8.

       horizontal-pad
           Horizontal padding, in pixels, between border and content. Default:
           40.

       vertical-pad
           Vertical padding, in pixels, between border and content. Default:
           8.

       inner-pad
           Vertical padding between prompt and match list, in pixels. Default:
           0.

       image-size-ratio
           The ratio of the large image displayed when there are only a "few"
           matches, compared to the full window size. Set to 1 to disable the
           the large images. Default: 0.5.

       line-height
           Override line height from font metrics. Default: use font metrics.

       letter-spacing
           Additional letter spacing. Negative values are allowed. Default: 0.

       layer
           Which layer to render the fuzzel window on. Valid values are top
           and overlay.

           top renders above normal windows, but typically below fullscreen
           windows and lock screens.

           overlay renders on top of both normal windows and fullscreen
           windows. Note that the order is undefined if several windows use
           the same layer. Since e.g. lock screens typically use overlay, that
           means fuzzel may or may not appear on top of a lock screen.

           Default: overlay

       keyboard-focus
           Keyboard focusing mode, valid modes are exclusive and on-demand.

           exclusive locks keyboard focus to fuzzel, receiving all keyboard
           input until closed.

           on-demand makes fuzzel focus like a regular window, allowing other
           windows to take keyboard focus by e.g. clicking on them. By default
           switching keyboard focus will immediately close fuzzel, using exit-
           on-keyboard-focus-loss=no allows interacting with other windows
           while fuzzel is open.

           Default: exclusive

       exit-on-keyboard-focus-loss
           Boolean. If true, exit when the fuzzel window loses keyboard focus.

           Setting this to false can be useful on compositors where enabling
           "focus-follows-mouse" causes fuzzel to exit as soon as the mouse is
           moved over another window. Sway (<= 1.7) exhibits this behavior,
           for example.

           Default: yes

       render-workers
           Number of threads to use for rendering. Set to 0 to disable
           multithreading. Default: the number of available logical CPUs
           (including SMT). Note that this is not always the best value. In
           some cases, the number of physical cores is better.

           In case you have a ridiculous amount of cores and/or threads,
           consider limiting the number of render-workers, since fuzzel cannot
           parallelize more than the number of displayed entries.

       match-workers
           Number of threads to use for matching. Set to 0 to disable
           multithreading. Default: the number of available logical CPUs
           (including SMT). Note that this is not always the best value. In
           some cases, the number of physical cores is better.

           In case you have a ridiculous amount of cores and/or threads,
           consider limiting the number of match-workers, since fuzzel cannot
           parallelize more than the number of available entries.

       delayed-filter-ms
           Time, in milliseconds, to delay refiltering when there are more
           matches than delayed-filter-limit. Default: 300.

       delayed-filter-limit
           When there are more matches than this, switch from immediate
           refiltering to delayed refiltering (see delayed-filter-ms).
           Default: 20000.

       scaling-filter
           Scaling filter to use when down scaling PNGs. One of none, nearest,
           bilinear, box, linear, cubic, lanczos2, lanczos3 and
           lanczos3-stretched.

           none, nearest and bilinear are the fastest options, but also have
           the worst looking results.

           cubic, lanczos2, lanczos3 and lanczos3-stretched are the slowest
           options, with the best looking results.

           box, and to some degree, linear, are in the middle, performance
           wise, while in most cases still being just as, or close to, as good
           as cubic and the lanczos filters.

           Default: box

       cache
           Specify the default cache location. If unset,
           $XDG_CACHE_HOME/fuzzel will be used. Set to /dev/null to disable
           caching. Default: not set.

       auto-select
           Boolean. When one entry is left, automatically select it. Default:
           no.

       enable-mouse
           Boolean. Enable mouse input. Default: yes.

SECTION: colors
       All color values are in RGBA.

       background
           Background color. Default: fdf6e3ff.

       text
           Text (foreground) color of unselected entries. Default: 657b83ff.

       prompt
           Text (foreground) color of prompt character(s). Default: 586e75ff.

       placeholder
           Text (foreground) color of the placeholder string. Default:
           93a1a1ff.

       input
           Text (foreground) color of input string. Default: 657b83ff.

       match
           Text (foreground) color of the matched substring. Default:
           cb4b16ff.

       selection
           Background color of the selected entry. Default: eee8d5ff.

       selection-text
           Text (foreground) color of the selected entry. Default: 586e75ff.

       selection-match
           Text (foreground) color of the matched substring of the selected
           entry. Default: cb4b16ff.

       counter=HEX
           The color of the match count stats printed at the right-hand side
           of the input prompt. See COLORS. Default: 93a1a1ff.

       border
           Border color. Default: 002b36ff.

SECTION: border
       width
           Width of the border, in pixels. Default: 1.

       radius
           Amount of corner "roundness". Default: 10.

       selection-radius
           Amount of corner "roundness" for the selected entry. Default: 0.

SECTION: dmenu
       mode
           One of text or index. Determines what fuzzel prints on stdout when
           an entry is selected: text prints the entry itself, index prints
           the index of the selected entry. Index values start at zero for the
           first entry. Default: text.

       exit-immediately-if-empty
           Boolean. If enabled, fuzzel will not run at all (i.e. it will not
           open a window, and will not print anything on stdout) if there's
           nothing on stdin. Default: no.

SECTION: key-bindings
       This section lets you override the default key bindings.

       The general format is action=combo1...comboN. That is, each action may
       have one or more key combinations, space separated. Each combination is
       in the form mod1+mod2+key. The names of the modifiers and the key must
       be valid XKB key names.

       Note that if Shift is one of the modifiers, the key must not be in
       upper case. For example, Control+Shift+V will never trigger, but
       Control+Shift+v will.

       Note that Alt is usually called Mod1.

       xkbcli interactive-wayland can be useful for finding keysym names.

       A key combination can only be mapped to one action. Lets say you want
       to bind Control+k to next. Since this is the default shortcut for
       delete-line-forward, you must unmap the default binding. This can be
       done by setting action=none; e.g. delete-line-forward=none.

       cancel
           Quit fuzzel without executing anything. Default: Control+g
           Control+c Control+bracketleft Escape.

       execute
           Execute the currently selected entry. Or, in dmenu mode, print the
           selected entry on stdout. Default: Return KP_Enter Control+y.

       execute-or-next
           If there is a single match, execute it. Or, in dmenu mode, print
           the selected entry on stdout. If there are more than one match,
           select the next entry. Wraps around when the last entry has been
           reached. Default: Tab.

       execute-input
           Execute the raw input as is, regardless of whether it matches
           anything in the list or not. In dmenu mode, prints the selected
           entry on stdout instead. Default: Shift+Return Shift+KP_Enter.

       cursor-left
           Moves the cursor one character to the left. Default: Left
           Control+b.

       cursor-left-word
           Moves the cursor one word to the left. Default: Control+Left
           Mod1+b.

       cursor-right
           Moves the cursor one character to the right. Default: Right
           Control+f.

       cursor-right-word
           Moves the cursor one word to the right. Default: Control+Right
           Mod1+f.

       cursor-home
           Moves the cursor to the beginning of the input. Default: Home
           Control+a.

       cursor-end
           Moves the cursor to the end of the input. Default: End Control+e.

       delete-input
           There is no standalone binding to clear the input. Use cursor-home
           (Control+a) to go into the beginning of the input, followed the
           delete-line-forward binding (Control+k). Alternatively, if you are
           at the end of the input, use delete-line-backward (Control+u).
           These are alternatives to using "select all" to highlight text (not
           supported by fuzzel) and then delete it.

       delete-line-backward
           Deletes everything before the cursor. Default: Control+u.

       delete-line-forward
           Deletes everything after the cursor. Default: Control+k.

       delete-prev
           Deletes the character before the cursor. Default: BackSpace
           Control+h.

       delete-prev-word
           Deletes the word before the cursor. Default: Mod1+BackSpace
           Control+BackSpace Control+w.

       delete-next
           Deletes the character after the cursor. Default: Delete.

       delete-next-word
           Deletes the word after the cursor. Default: Mod1+d Control+Delete.

       delete-line-forward
           Deletes everything after the cursor. Default: Control+k.

       delete-line
           Deletes the entire input. Default: Control+Shift+BackSpace.

       insert-selected
           Copies the selected entry to the prompt, replacing the current
           prompt. In application mode, the Exec line is inserted, and in
           dmenu mode the entry itself is used. Default: Control+Tab.

       expunge
           Removes the currently selected entry from the cache (of most
           commonly launched applications). Default: Shift+Delete.

       clipboard-paste
           Pastes from the clipbard. Default: Control+v XF86Paste.

       primary-paste
           Pastes from the primary selection. This action is also bound to the
           middle mouse button (this is currently not configurable). Default:
           Shift+Insert Shift+KP_Insert.

       prev
           Select the previous entry. Does not wrap around when the first
           entry has been reached. Default: Up Control+p.

       prev-with-wrap
           Select the previous entry. Wraps around when the first entry has
           been reached. Default: ISO_Left_Tap. (Shift+Tab)

       prev-page
           Switch to the previous page. Default: PageUp KP_PageUp.

       next
           Select the next entry. Does not wrap around when the last entry has
           been reached. Default: Down Control+n.

       next-with-wrap
           Select the next entry. Wraps around when the last entry has been
           reached. Default: unbound.

       next-page
           Switch to the next page. Default: Page_Down KP_Page_Down.

       first
           Select the first entry, on the first page. Default: Control+Home.

       last
           Select the last entry, on the last page. Default: Control+End.

       custom-1, custom-2, ..., custom-19
           Execute the currently selected entry, then exit with a non-zero
           exit code. custom-1 exits with exit code 10, custom-2 with 11,
           custom-3 with 12, and so on.

           Default:
               o   custom-1: Mod1+1
               o   custom-2: Mod1+2
               o   custom-3: Mod1+3
               o   custom-4: Mod1+4
               o   custom-5: Mod1+5
               o   custom-6: Mod1+6
               o   custom-7: Mod1+7
               o   custom-8: Mod1+8
               o   custom-9: Mod1+9
               o   custom-10: Mod1+10
               o   custom-11: Mod1+11
               o   custom-12: Mod1+12
               o   custom-13: Mod1+13
               o   custom-14: Mod1+14
               o   custom-15: Mod1+15
               o   custom-16: Mod1+16
               o   custom-17: Mod1+17
               o   custom-18: Mod1+18
               o   custom-19: Mod1+19

FONT CONFIG
       Fontconfig uses a flexible string format for specifying fonts that
       allows you to define font families, styles, weights, and various
       properties. The basic syntax follows this pattern:

           "Family Name:style=Style:weight=Weight:size=Size"

       Common Properties:

       o   family - Font family name
       o   style - italic, oblique, roman
       o   weight - light, normal, bold, black (or numeric values 100-900)
       o   size - Point size
       o   slant - italic, oblique, roman
       o   width - condensed, normal, expanded

       Fontconfig supports fallback fonts. You can specify multiple font
       families separated by commas. The fallback fonts are searched in the
       order they appear. If a glyph cannot be found in any of the fallback
       fonts, the dynamic fallback list from fontconfig (for the primary font)
       is searched. Ex:

           "My Custom Font, DejaVu Sans:weight=bold, sans-serif"

       Fontconfig always returns something unless you don't have any fonts
       installed, regardless of what font name you give it. You can check
       fonts that would be matched with `fc-match -s YourFontName`.

       The font library Fuzzel uses, fcft, will search the explicit fallbacks
       whenever a glyph cannot be found in the primary font. When it cannot
       find a glyph in the explicit fallbacks, then it searches the fontconfig
       fallbacks of the first font in Fuzzel's list.

       This design allows a custom fallback sequence as well as custom font
       options for each fallback.

SEE ALSO
       o   fuzzel(1)
       o   https://specifications.freedesktop.org/desktop-entry-spec/desktop-
           entry-spec-latest.html
       o   https://codeberg.org/dnkl/fuzzel

                                  2025-08-21                     fuzzel.ini(5)
